Restoration of the Samuel Sullivan Cox Journal

Assessing the Journal

Well, there are.... First of all, as you can see, the cover is quite badly worn. It is leather. It is scuffed— a very typical kind of scuffing for this kind of leather. It is pretty much still in one piece. The pages in the text block are still essentially together, at least they are in the right order. There are some things pasted in here. Again, this is a handwritten journal of a trip to Europe. I guess I should mention this is by Samuel Sullivan Cox. The journal dates from 1851. This journal would have been purchased . . . the book itself would have been purchased as a blank book at a stationers. In fact, it has a label in it, the original bookseller's label: sold by William W. Rose, stationer, 19 Wall Street, New York City. It would have been a blank book made up with a leather binding for this purpose, and he pretty much filled it up with writing. The covering is a very standard sort of early of early American sheepskin binding. It is very plain. The spine is gone . . . the leather spine. It would have been a full leather binding. There is some masking tape on there. It's been repaired. It's got some water stains. It's been etched into the cover with some sharp tool: S. S. Cox—can't quite read it. It says something about a journal; it says USA.  This is a very primitive way of titling it, I guess— instead of gold tooling or anything like that. The spine would have been very plain, probably wouldn't have had a title on it. It may have just been a plain leather spine, although there might have been some tooled lines across the spine. As you can see, the pages here at the folds . . . this book is made up of sections of, I don't know, 8 to 10 leaves folded together and sewn together through the center folds, and all these sections are sewn together, and the sewing is joined here along the spine, and you can see the center fold— or the back fold—on many, on most of these sections is worn away is broken away. That's from wear and tear. And also the original leather would have been glued right directly to the backbone, to the spine of the paper, so as that wore down it tore that outer fold. That will be repaired later on. The first thing I will do is, I will go through this, I will think of what needs to be done. I have already talked to the curators about what they are interested in and the whole scope of this project. 

[Interviewer]: It is tempting to think that the water damage happened on the RMS Asia during his crossing of the Atlantic, but it could have happened at any time during the past 150 years I suppose. 

[Campbell]: That's right. The water damage is fairly minor. I don't think in fact the text block has any water damage at all. There may be a few stains. It looks like it might have a little bit but, there are . . . there is some staining on the cover, and in fact it looks like someone put a coffee cup or something down the cover at one point. There's a stain here. 

Planning the Restoration

In the midst of treatment of this volume, it will be scanned when the volume is taken apart so that we have digital access to this, to the pages, where the book . . . the original artifact . . . won't have to be handled so much just for people to basically read the text. Now the treatment that we will be doing will take that into consideration, and in mid treatment we will stop and in fact do the scanning. As the book is now, it would be very difficult to use, especially to use the book without doing further damage. It is very much at risk right now; it is at a point where it is very vulnerable to further damage if it . . . with any handling. So it is important at this point to consider and to think about stabilizing that just for the future use of this book as a book. And that will include all the cover issues and all the text block issues, meaning. . . . the book probably has to be resewn because all of the outer folds are broken away, and in fact the sewing is broken in a number of places, so it is so far gone . . . it's far enough gone that it needs to be redone completely. That will make it a good solid working . . . mechanically, structurally it will work like a book. In the midst of that we will . . . since we will have the sewing taken apart and have all the pages apart as loose leaves, that's the ideal time to do the scanning because they can be handled as flat pages, and you don't have any structural or mechanical issues at that point that you have to be real careful with. Some of the work will be done to the text pages before the scanning is done so that all of the folds are intact, and in fact each section will be a folded section ready to be sewn. It can just be taken one page at a time and handled in a very delicate way in a very easy way . . . relatively easy . . . compared to trying to scan the pages of a bound book.

[Section on Numbering Pages Prior to Disbinding]

Lifting Pastedown Endpapers

I would normally start with a sharpened spatula, a sharpened micro-spatula, and just work my way in and under the edges, and work my way around very, very carefully, and then at some point, I take this large pastry knife, which is a very thin . . . it's not as sharp as this little edge here, but it's very thin and flexible, and plus it's very large, and you can work on a . . . you have a lot more . . . you can do much more gentle kinds of strokes, and it lifts a larger area at once. But somehow it's easier to control than a little small one like this. I'll just continue here where I was. . . . Cooked starch pastes have been around for a long time, rice starch paste or wheat starch paste. You can imagine doing this on a large document of some sort 

[Interviewer]: Especially if the size of the document is longer than the blade. 

[Campbell:]Yeah . . . you actually have to get your hand in underneath it and hold the piece up. It's quite common in fact, lifting art . . . artwork from acidic boards that they have been mounted to, or sometimes photos mounted with heat set tissue. Like I said, it's quite common to have to lift them this way, and it just takes a lot of patience and a lot of time. Luckily, this is very robust paper. It's fairly heavy paper. It's not brittle, not acidic. It has some . . . it holds together while you are doing this. Here's the original surface of the sheep skin, right here where it was not adhered, where there was never any glue. There was never any paste right there, so it is sort of undisturbed right there, which often is in better condition  

Disbinding the Text Block

Not much sewing left here, but what's there I can go ahead and cut from the outside . . . just make it a little easier to pull it from the inside. You see how loose it is already, and you can see the tears where the folds have come apart as well. Again, we have these pages numbered now, so I will be trying to pay a little bit of attention to where the center of the signature fold is . . . of the section . . . so how many . . . essentially how many leaves there are in each section. It'll make it a little easier when I'm putting the section back together to know which leaves are conjugate with the pages on the other side.  

[Interviewer]: So the goal is to have the gathers be identical? 

[Campbell]: Yes . . . or like they were originally. So here one, two, three, four, five. Okay, so that looks like these were five sheets folded around each other, so it's a signature . . . or the section is made up of 10 leaves or 20 pages, and then sure enough this leaf here, which you might confuse for a leaf that goes to this section and conjugate with one of these over here, you can see here that it's still attached to its conjugate sheet, which is at the back of this signature. That gets a little confusing at times because of the adhesives. You know, when the spine is lined, and the pages get stuck together, and the outer folds are actually held more tightly together than the pages within the folds.  

[Interviewer]: Right. And it looked as though the page was creased in a way that would maybe make you think it was connected to a different page . . . or the leaf was creased. 

[Campbell]:See now here, this is a little deceiving here. It's connected and you think okay, is that leaf conjugate with that? Actually, there's no way because this is . . . they wouldn't be conjugate without sewing in between them, and without other pages in between them. What's holding them together is the glue from the spine, which is what I was just talking about. So, basically, to get this page back to where it belongs, you have to do that so you end up with a full section right here, and there is the outer fold barely there, and then the next. The inner folds are in pretty good shape, which is good, and in fact the sewing holes are in very good shape. We'll probably just use the original sewing holes and not have to worry about very fragile paper there, and this is probably, in most cases, throughout this book, this is probably the only fold that will need to be mended before it is resewn. 

[Interviewer]: So if you can avoid piercing the paper again, you will, when you sew it. 

[Campbell]: Sometimes with real brittle paper or very delicate paper, it is almost better to make a new hole, especially if there's some support on the outside, some repairs that you've done on the outside, but in a case like this it's definitely better just to go with the original sewing holes. It's connected here, so... here's the last leaf of this section right here, and I'm just going to pop it away from this adhesive here . . . and there it is.  It is still quite flexible and pretty robust for what it is, but still, the linen itself, the fibers, don't really last forever.  It's like old clothing.  I've seen some tests of certain fibers and bookbinding cloths -that sort of thing-comparing linen and cotton that seem to show that cotton is actually more durable in a long run. It will last longer and hold up more, so the long-term endurance. . . . Again, I'm getting ready to separate this here, and that . . . that . . . the reason these are together right here . . . is the adhesive from the . . . when the spine was . . . after it was sewn it was glued up, and the leather was put on, and that adhesive got down in between the sections a little bit and basically glues them together. It's sort of consolidates the spine, and we still use adhesives that way.  I have a different light here. Is that . . . 

[Interviewer]: That's fine. 

[Campbell]: Okay. Good. We're down to the very end.  

[Interviewer]: So how many gathers were there? 

[Campbell]: I think ten, but let me count again real quick. Oh, no. Two, four, six, eight. Yes. And there are 166- including the paste downs-166 pages. 

Repairing Folds

I'm going to look at the folds here where the sewing is going to go through again, and as you see, this fold is in pretty good shape, as are the rest of the sheets in this section where they are folded around. They are in pretty good condition. The sewing holes are not torn out or opened up or widened or anything. They are the way they were when it was originally sewn. So the only one that really is damaged, again, is the outer fold. That's because it was on the spine. It had the leather glued right to it, and the leather had caused some deterioration. Of course, that's where most of the wear and tear is, and it just breaks down there. So it is a combination of having the adhesives there -the leather glued right to it- and most of the flexing when the book opens and closes. We are going to leave that little bit connected right there and put a thin piece of Japanese paper over this area, and we want to be careful not to make it so wide that it covers up any of the printing here. I mean the writing. You don't want to use something too lightweight and too thin, which if it covered some of the writing it wouldn't matter because you would probably be able to see through it, but you want something that's fairly strong because you are going to be sewing through that. Again, that's going to be the outer fold, so it is kind of a compromise. So what I'm going to do is, first of all, I'm going to score this with a needle just so I can tear it in a fairly straight line but still have a fairly soft edge instead of having a cut edge, which would act like a breaking edge, you know, like a piece of Scotch tape or something. This is a little more gentle.  Sometimes this type of tissue is torn with water. You actually take a brush and you put a bead of water all along a certain line or a shape, and the tissue when it's wet it gets very weak. When it's wet you can tear it right along where it's been wetted. And the same thing here. Just by scoring it and then tear it, you leave that sort of a softer edge. Okay. I'm going to paste this up now. And I have wheat starch paste. Move it over here . . . on a dry surface there, take my section, and I'll put this down  covering approximately half the width of the tissue strip, and I'll use this paper here to fold it over. That's not sticking . . . let's do it by hand.  This is doing it the hard way.  It's just such a thin strip 

[Interviewer]: Especially in a journal like this, where they might have written across the spine.  

[Campbell]: Yeah, that's the thing that I'm most concerned about. There's writing right up to the edges of the inner margins. . . .  I may want to do this one again. And the same on this side. 

[Interviewer]: That will give you a surface to sew through?  

[Campbell]: It's not really overlapping very far, but when that paste is dry, it will be adequate to, you know, that tissue will hold on there and be well attached to this paper, and then when we're able to open that up and sew through it, it will be good strong Japanese . . . long fiber Japanese tissue paper. Right now I'm going to actually put the rest of the section inside there so that it kind of molds to the shape, the full thickness of the section here. . . . 

Resewing

This is the beginning of the sewing. I have gone through this section, the first section, and erased the pencil marks that I had put down for page numbers, and I will do that with each section before I sew it on. I'm going to sew through the original sewing holes very much like it was sewn originally, and instead of on vellum sewing supports, I'm using linen sewing supports, and I've got them set up on the sewing frame so that they are lined up with the original sewing stations. So first of all, I will find the center fold of this section, line it up with the sewing tapes. And I'm going to put a weight on here so that it doesn't move around. I am going to lace this thread -this is a linen thread-which I've got . . . I've already got it waxed. I've got it on a needle here. I've just got it laced through the needle. I'm going to lock it on right now by spreading the twist out and pushing the needle through the twist and then just pulling it back. That locks it in place so that the needle doesn't fall off a lot. Now I'm going to start the sewing where the original sewing began. First I will pierce a hole from the inside, but then I will put the needle through that hole from the outside, and that is the beginning of the sewing right there. Now I will leave a little bit of a tail out here so that I can tie off onto that when I get to the end of the next signature. Is this okay, turning it this way? You can see this okay? What I'm doing? Okay. So now I'm going to sew through the center fold so that the sewing will go on the outside around these supports here. Sometimes it is a little bit of a struggle to get the needle through with the knot, through those holes. And I am making sure that the thread is snug. I don't want to pull it too tight. As I come in the inside, I just make sure that I'm pulling it tight, that it's tightening up around the sewing supports here. I'll take this weight off. Go to the next signature. 

Joining Signatures

So here's the tail from when I started sewing in that first signature, and then I have come back and here's where I am now. And I'm going to simply pull these tight, make sure they're nice and tight along here, and then I will tie a square knot here. So that anchors the sewing at that point. As I go up, I will do simply a chain stitch here and here, and this is actually called the kettle stitch. The sewing stations at the beginning and the end, that doesn't involve the sewing support, and it basically chains or links the sections together at the head and the tail of the book. So from here on in, that's how I will connect each signature. 

Kettle Stitch

I've put them needle through between these two sections below the one I'm sewing, and I am going to make a little loop and bring the needle up through that loop like so, and pull it tight, and that is how all of the sections will be linked together from here to the end, and that is called the kettle stitch. It is from the German word for a chain stitch. 

Making New Boards

Well, do you see that little nick that's been cut off the corner of the board there? That's called back cornering. That will allow the leather to. . . . When I form the head around here the leather will tuck down into there and it will have a very traditional look, which you will recognize when you see it. It's a little bit hard to tell here. Also, the boards have been lined with a Japanese paper and paste so that they will warp. You can see the warp in them. I just did that this morning. That is to counteract the damp leather, which, when it is put on the boards, and as it dries, it will try to pull it back that way because the leather will try to shrink. So this will help counteract that. Also helping that later on will be these pastes . . . when I paste these down. As they dry, again, they will tend to shrink and pull the boards in. 

[Interviewer]: So basically what you're saying is that if you hadn't done that, the book would've pulled open. 

[Campbell]: Yes, exactly. The boards would. . . . Instead of sort of a more traditional, comfortable sort of boards wrapping around the text like that you would have them splaying out like that. 

[Interviewer]: Is it just the moisture from the glue that helps it to pull inward, or how does it actually work? To get it to . . . 

[Campbell]: It's the . . . As the . . . When you put the paste on the paper or the leather it swells up because the fibers absorbing moisture, tend to swell, and then it's . . . the paste is adhering it to this solid surface . . . relatively solid surface. So, as the paste dries out and the moisture evaporates, the fibers in the paper try to go . . . and the leather . . . try to go back to where they were before. So they are actually shrinking, and they are glued . . . they are adhered to the surface and there if it has enough pull . . . it'll pull that board. It'll warp that board like that. And that's what it's doing. So you have to balance that out with what's on the outside and what's on the inside. It's not such a big deal on cloth, but leather you really have to do that. And you can see the paper is just pasted on. It's just a sanding block. It cuts that loose like that. Quick and easy. Now the boards are ready to go. I marked them front and back, top. 

Making a New Binding 1

Here's the leather. It's calfskin. It's fairly similar to what was on here in color, although this was sheepskin. We don't really use sheepskin in binding anymore because it deteriorates. It just doesn't last, plus it skins very easily, it scuffs and skins and separates. So this is a nice little piece of calfskin  that's made for bookbinding; It's very stable. Modern methods are used for the tanning. It's vegetable tanned leather. It's good for dampening and molding into the form of a book cover. As you see, the edges are are thinner— paper-thin edges as opposed to the relative thickness in the middle. In these days they pared the leather extremely thin all over, so often the books would wear out around the edges  and they would break down in the hinges. So, today, we use the leather a little bit heavier. We don't pare it so much. We only do this edge paring, which you can see here. 

[Student]: What do you use to pare it? 

[Campbell]: A knife like this. It's called a paring knife. And a spoke shave. This one's been altered. It has a wider opening. But this is just a wood spoke shave. And the shape of the blade is a little bit different too, and it's sharpened in a particular way. And . . . it's just a matter of doing that. And this is a matter of just going along the edge and paring it so that you have a real nice bevel and very thin edge, and it gets thinner as it goes up toward the edge. And I do that on glass or a stone that we have that's special so that it won't mark up the table or bang up the knife. So I just wanted to show you those. Okay. I'll put that away. Now, the first thing I'll do is dampen this leather and this . . .  this allows you to mold the leather into shape. It also helps the paste- which we'll put on the other side- absorb into the leather so that the leather becomes sort of saturated with the paste and. . . . It's a wheat starch paste that I'm using. And, I'll just keep that damp. Here's the paste, here. This is fairly sticky stuff. It's more like a gelatinous kind of texture. It doesn't have a lot of real tackiness, like Elmer's glue or some of the white PBA type of glues that we use-polyvinyl acetate- although you can mix this with that. And this is used traditionally with leather . . . . . . with paper when you are pasting paper to something this is more and more what's used. I'll go ahead, and as you see we get it pretty well coated. 

[Interviewer]: Harry, for Julia, can you look up for a second? 

[Campbell]: Right at you? 

[Interviewer]: Yep. That's what she asked for. 

[Campbell]: Oh, yeah, for the. . . . 

[Interviewer]: Actually working. . . . 

[Campbell]: Okay, how did that look? If you need me to do that again. . . . So right now I'm going to book this. At least that's what they call it in working with wallpaper. I don't know if there is a term for it in book binding. Just gonna let that soak for a little bit. Has anyone ever done wallpaper? Get this a little wet. 

[Interviewer]: Let's try another one. Can you just sort of pause and look up? Good. 

[Campbell]: I think I was blinking. 

[Interviewer]: You were. 

[Campbell]: Anytime you want me to do that, let me know. I'm just gonna let that soak for a bit. These are going to be used, obviously, to assemble the case. This will go in between those. It will actually go on the spine. It's not absolutely necessary since I have a hollow lining on that, but I like to give the spine a little bit more substance 

[inaudible], and often when you're making . . . when you are doing a leather case binding, it's easier to construct like a regular case. Which, in fact is three pieces. The same is true for that book and most clothbound books. And this one, although it was case-bound, it was not done that way; it had the leather . . . it didn't have any kind of inlay strip like this down the spine,  it just had the leather right to the spine. I could do it that way, but, again, it's going to be more flexible doing it the way that I'm doing it with the hollow tube. Also, in the head cap areas here where the leather's turned over, I'll put these little bits of. . . . They're hard to see, but they're. . . . It's a little linen twine, I've rolled it in a little bit of adhesive to give it some substance and keep it all together. But when I turn the leather over, I'll put those in at the top and the bottom of the spine so that the leather forms a little cap. Often books that are bound in leather . . . they have some kind of decorative end band at the top and the bottom of the spine, and the leather is formed over that— little caps are formed over that. This book didn't have any bands and . . . probably because of the type of book it was, it would've just had the leather turned over and some kind of head caps formed which. . . . And if there had been any evidence of . . . if there had been end bands sewn on or pasted on at some point, there would've been some kind of evidence, and there wasn't really. So I'm not putting any end bands on this book, but I'm going to use these to make a little . . . to give it a little shape and form head caps. And that's just cut out of that. Okay. Usually I would do . . . if I was doing a drawn-on leather binding, and I was going to do a lot of shaping and. . . . It's a lot more complicated because the book is all in one piece, and you've got to do the turn ends and you've got to work in behind the spine and get on the inside of the boards. It's a little trickier, and I would probably let it saturate for a little bit longer, but with this one I'm not going to have to do quite so much of that molding, so I'm going to get this one ready to go now. Another layer of paste. Most often, working with leather, I would work on a glass surface or right on this Formica, but but this'll be fine. It shows up better and you can see it a little bit easier . . . what I'm doing. Okay. I'm going to take the. . . . I think I'll start with the center piece and put it down approximately in the center here. 

[Interviewer]: You don't need to measure or anything like that? 

[Campbell]: What? 

[Interviewer]: Do you just eyeball it? 

[Campbell]: Just eyeball it, yeah. That's one thing, you sort of learn to trust your eyes as you go along, you know. So, and then I'm going to need a bit of space here right in the shoulder of the joint area there, and I've already kind of determined how tightly I want the book . . . those boards to sit up in there again, a book like this . . . most case-bound books have a joint right here. You can see that okay? Most leather-bound books, although not all, have a tight joint, where basically the board fits, you know, and the leather goes smooth right over that. And what I do when I do a binding like this, I don't form real hard shoulders, just gently sort of sloping up, and I don't try to put the boards up too tight to them when I make the binding. It's going to look like a tight back, but it will have a bit more flexibility in the joint. So, I've got this down here. I'll let that sit there for a minute. I'll take the back board. Let's look at this leather one more time. I guess it doesn't make much difference. Sometimes there are flaws in the leather and you put them on the back. Or if you're going to be doing some tooling or you have the spine a certain way and, you know, you want to kind of pay attention to what the leather looks like on the outside. So I'm going to just place that board, approximately there, which is about 3/16 of an inch- in case you're interested in the actual distance- and place the front board there. And you'll notice I put those back-cornered corners right here and there. I'm assuming that's going to fit okay. Give it a little test. That should be fine. I'll get them a little closer. I'm going to lay these little bits of twine right there and there. Hopefully they're not so small that they roll underneath the inlay strip or get lost in there, because they're pretty thin. I didn't want to make a real big substantial head cap. This one's pretty small and more delicate. Okay. Now the . . .  now that I got those there. . . . Put a new scalpel blade in here. Because I want that to be really sharp. Basically, I'm going to cut these corners off at a 45º angle and start turning in all this leather. But . . . you'll see. I'll come back to the corners. Is it in the way if I'm putting my hand here like that? Okay. I'm cutting at an angle so that it will have the little bevel cut there you can see. Like I said, I'm going to come back to that and refine that as I go along, as I start turning them in. Okay.  Now the . . . this is simply a matter of bringing the leather over.  These are called folders; they used to be made of bone. This is a bone folder, and this is Teflon. This is much better to work with leather. This is a pretty modern invention. But it doesn't mar the leather. You have to be very careful when you are working with wet leather. Especially metal or bone folders can . . . If you rub it too hard it can leave a dark line, you know, not only a dent but a . . . it kind of darkens. You pull that around not too tightly, do a little shaping, and here, I am going to push back on that little piece of thread that I have in there. I think it's right where I want it. Okay. Like I said, I don't want to stretch this too tight because leather when it's wet, you can really stretch it. Of course, what happens when it dries? It needs to go back to where it was before. So I don't want it pulling too much as it dries. So I'm not wrapping these around too tightly. Okay. Turn these over.  I guess before I do that . . . I should . . . 

[inaudible] I'm going to do a little bit of additional thinning on these corners here and . . . my hand is going to be right in your way, probably. 

[Interviewer]: I don't want you to cut yourself. I can move. 

[Campbell]: No, let's see, this might work. I'll just do it this way. Right at the point of that corner . . . I'm just thinning it out. . . . See, I've scooped out a little area here. So I've got the paper edged in there- the thin edge. While I'm doing that, I'll do all four corners. 

[Interviewer]: How fast does the glue begin to dry? How fast do you need to work? 

[Campbell]: The paste lasts . . . stays wet for a long time. 

[Interviewer]: Good. 

[Campbell]: Yeah.  Let's go back and do these too. I cut a lot out of that one. I hope I have enough left. Okay, let's start this over again. As you can see, paste is fairly forgiving. But it is slippery too, so you have to watch that things don't move around. This is exactly how the corners would have been done on a binding like this. No fuss, just thin the leather out a little bit and push it all together. Whereas in fine binding, fine leather binding, there are ways of making the corner very perfect, you know. So that the leather molds over very nicely, no overlapping. But when you rebind a book this way, you don't want it to look. . . . You know if it was real perfect and real refined- had handsewn end bands and all that— it would look . . . it would be . . . it might look nice but in a way, it would be awkward, and we are basically trying to replicate what was there before. Just because, you know, in a way, it's restoration. We know what it looked like before, and we have . . . and the materials are not, in most cases, reusable. So. That's looking all right. The edges of the original boards would have been much thinner because for one thing, the boards were thinner and also the leather was pared very thin. So these will be thicker and bulkier looking, but you can try to compromise with having a big . . . a heavier leather on there and a slightly thicker board with edges that are not too bulky and too indelicate. I'm trying to do a little shaping. Okay. Now this was . . .  I'll set that thing here a moment. . . . I'm going to make a little cap for this text block. This will just protect the edges of the text block from . . . offsetting the leather and any dyes in the leather and the moisture. I want the shoulder area here to essentially line up with the edge of this board right there, and that this white inlay strip here is the same width as the spine. And they will be connected together, so. Okay. At this point I'm just doing an initial sort of fitting, making sure it's all going to line up right and pretty even. At this point, I'm going to . . . make a little impression there. That's that back cornered area I was talking about. So you see it's starting to take the form of a traditional leather-bound book. Now I've got this right where I want it, so I'm gonna open the board and leave it sitting here, and I'm going to use a modern adhesive here to . . . this is a blend of polyvinyl acetate adhesive and paste and it's a little tackier and stronger and dries faster. And I'm going to use that to attach the inlay to the . . . to the spine here.  So I am coating both surfaces with a very thin coat . . . which . . . there won't be a lot of excess moisture there, it will dry faster, and when I put the two together, they will grab each other. There'll be two tacky surfaces coming together instead of one. Okay, now I'm going to, again, bring this back over where it was before, and I can feel that the boards are down on the inside of that shoulder, and you can see about where that . . . the joint actually is. Again, we won't be pressing that into a French joint, which is what this is called. But in fact there is a space there. 

Making a New Binding 2

I've prepared a little string with the slipknot in the end here, which I will . . . I'm going to tie it through these areas where I've made the back cornering impressions there. 

[Videographer}: One of the reasons I wanted to move a little closer is because when you are working with the string it had a real nice pop when you tighten it-it's satisfying. 

[Harry Campbell]: That's good. That's going to hold things in shape while I do, while I do some . . . sort of refining of the shape of these head caps. Okay. First I'm going to push back that way, and that way, widen that a little bit, and then flatten this head cap a little bit, which again you start to see a real traditional sort of look of a leather binding. With a little book like this it doesn't take much. Same thing here. Push that out a little. This way, that way. Flatten it out like so. And I think at this point I'll just get rid of this string 'cause it's . . . again, it's a very. . . . I might want to work on those areas. No, actually that looks pretty good. I think I might just leave it. That looks good. Okay. Now, the only part that is adhered so far is right. . . . I haven't put the cloth joints or the sewing slips down or anything, and I won't do that right now. What I'm going to do is just rub this spine down one more time, make sure it's in contact, and then the. . . .  I'll do it right here so you can see what I'm doing. I would normally just do this over the edge here I will just slide it out here. Okay. I'll square up these edges just a little bit. Again, the leather is still wet, you know, and the paste is still wet, and it's all very moldable at this point.  It's starting to dry out. You can see the color coming back. But, you know, if you touch it, it is cold and damp. And at this point, I'm ready to then just... I'll insert some blotters to absorb moisture inside the boards and put blotters on the outside and then put it under weight pretty much until it's dry. I mean, after a little while I'll come back, and I'll actually open it up and make sure that the hollow tube inside there is still functioning like a hollow tube. When you use thin paper for those hollow tubes, you have to worry about the adhesive actually going through it so . . . I'm not too worried but . . . I've got those blotter sheets right up to the joint in there. Okay.  I'll put this there. 
